# General Format of C++ Code

Source files can be overwhelming to start working in. This section is 
dedicated to clarifying and giving more context to the various keywords
and formatting features of the language.
---
Let's take a look at some basic code - this is generated by my IDE (Integrated
Development Environment) whenever I create a new project in Clion.
```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    
    std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```
Running this code as is, gives us the result:
```
Hello World
```
### general understanding of what the program does

This is a hello world program. As you can see, it prints "Hello World" to
the console. This is a pretty typical first project among new programmers.
If you are already familiar with code, this is probably nothing new. Lets
break down the code itself line by line, starting with the `#include`

---
## Lets break down what's happening on each line

```c++
#include <iostream>
```
First off, what in the heck is `iostream`? Basically, it is just a really large 
file filled with code for inputting and outputting stuff. If you remove this 
line, you'll probably get an error on the line containing `std::cout`.

`#include` is a **preprocessor directive**. When the compiler begins
compiling, any lines with `#` are looked at and run first (before actual
code). `#include` is a essentially a big copy and paste instruction. When
we `#include iostream`, what we are doing is copying the contents of the 
iostream file and pasting it where the #include directive is in our current 
file.

We will talk more about files - and learn to use `#include` with our own
files <!-- in  [Header Files](./HeaderFiles.md) -->.
---
```c++
int main () {
    //code goes here
    return 0;
}
```
This is what is known as your main function. It is your computer's entrypoint
into your program. Most variables and instructions will be written in this 
function.`return 0;` is our program's way of telling us that the program ran
successfully.

We'll go in much more detail about functions - their structure, how to make our
own, what the `return` keyword does - in the future. For now, make sure your 
main function looks identical to what is shown above.
---
```c++
std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
```
This line of code is what prints out "Hello World" to the console. We will cover
cout in more detail later <!-- in [Input-Output](./InputOutput.md) -->. I would
recommend playing around with cout and try to apply your knowledge of 
[variables](./Variables.md)
---
### Formatting
The compiler does not read whitespace (spacing and tabbing, etc.) in the
source (cpp) file. This means you could technically write code like:
```c++
#include <iostream> int main(){ std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl; return 0;}
```
I would **strongly** discourage coding in one line like so. This is incredibly hard
to read and as your files get longer (it is typical to have hundreds of lines of code)
you will have a hard time navigating your code.

You also do not want code like this:
```c++
#include <iostream>
int main() {
std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
return 0;
}
```
It has become a standard among programmers to indent code within curly braces
(`{` `}`) and while this code is much better than the previous block, it will
be difficult to read, especially as the source file grows in size.

*Get in the habit of formatting cleanly early on in your coding journey*

---
# [Go back to the home page](HomePage.md)
